#summary Windows build process using MinGW

=The Build Process in Windows using MinGW=

_Don Robinson, [http://www.essa.com ESSA] Technologies, May 2014_

This wiki documents the process of setting things up on a Windows PC so you can build FVS executables from the source files in the open-fvs repository. Builds of 32-bit versions have been tested on XP SP3, and 64-bit builds may be tested by the end of 2013. For more information on the build process, including information for builds on other platforms please refer to [BuildProcess_UnixAlike], [BuildProcess_VisualStudio], or the [FAQ].

= Contents =

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

==Getting the Necessary Tools==

You will need Administrator privileges to install the necessary tools, so ensure you have that before proceeding.

You will need to install the *MinGW (Minimalist GNU for Windows)* system. Information about MinGW can be found at [http://www.mingw.org/ www.mingw.org], and the MinGW install pack can be found at [http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw/files http://sourceforge.net]. Download the MinGW installer (mingw-get-setup.exe) and accept the default components(C, C++ and Fortran compilers). The Cmake build steps described below have been tested using the default installation directory with the Version 4.8.1 compilers. You will also need to modify the PATH environment variable to add the MinGW directory:

{{{
C:\MinGW\bin
}}}

One way to do this is to right-click the _My Computer_ icon on the Windows desktop and select Properties. Click the Advanced tab, then the Environment Variables button. Locate *PATH* or *Path* from either the User variables or System variables, then click Edit. At the end of the current set of PATH directories add "; C:\MinGW\bin". Then click OK buttons until you get back to the desktop.

You will also need to install the *Cmake* software, which can be found at [http://cmake.org/cmake/resources/software.html http://cmake.org]. Download and install the latest version. The Cmake build steps described below have been tested with _Version 2.8_.

Your development work will likely mean that you will eventually merge your work into the trunk code. Please see the [Testing] wiki to learn about the requirements for testing model behavior prior to integrating code. Note that creating and running FVS tests requires the following (Unix) utilities: `make, echo, grep, diff` and  `rm`. 

==Getting the Source Files==
Please visit [DownloadingSourceCode] to find out about SVN clients and the FVS code base.

==Building the MinGW Makefile with Cmake==
Open a DOS Command Window and navigate to the directory which contains the FVS code base. If you aren't familiar with the command prompt, click Start > (All) Programs > Accessories > Command Prompt and the Command Window should open to your personal directory. Assuming you have the FVS code base installed as described under [DownloadingSourceCode], use the `cd` command to navigate to the `trunk\bin` directory inside the directory into which you checked out the open-fvs files. If you had placed the files into a directory called `MyFvsFiles` you would type the command as shown below.

{{{
cd \MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin
}}}

Once you have navigated to the correct directory you are ready to use Cmake to create the MinGW Makefile. If MinGW is installed, Cmake should automatically detect it and build the Makefile for each FVS variant. (If this does not happen automatically, please post the problem so that it can be resolved.)

At the command line type (don't forget the '.' at the end!)

{{{
cmake -G"MinGW Makefiles" .
}}}

This will begin the creation of MinGW makefiles for _all_ FVS variants.
Each variant's Makefile will be placed in a sub-directory like this

{{{
\MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin\FVSiec_CmakeDir
}}}

FVS variant subdirectories are named with the pattern `FVS***_CmakeDir`, where `***` is a 2- or 3-letter abbreviation for the variant (e.g., 2-letters `ie` for Inland Empire or `ls` for Lake States) optionally followed by a 1-letter abbreviation for an extension (e.g., `x` for the insect and disease extensions, or `c` for the climate extension).

Cmake utilizes two kinds of files to create each variant makefile. First, it uses a master script file called *CMakeLists.txt* to control the creation of the makefile. (You are welcome to inspect this file, but editing it is not recommended for beginners.) This master script file utilizes a set of about 20 files in turn - one for each variant - with names like 'FVSiec_sourceList.txt'. These files need to exist in the `trunk\bin` directory in order to build the variants. 

As Cmake creates each variant makefile you will see something like this:

{{{
-- Building FVS variant with MinGW
-- tobuild = <...>/trunk/bin/FVSiec_sourceList.txt
-- The C compiler identification is GNU 4.8.1
-- The CXX compiler identification is GNU 4.8.1
-- The Fortran compiler identification is GNU
-- Check for working C compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/gcc.exe
-- Check for working C compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/gcc.exe -- works
-- Detecting C compiler ABI info
-- Detecting C compiler ABI info - done
-- Check for working CXX compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/g++.exe
-- Check for working CXX compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/g++.exe -- works
-- Detecting CXX compiler ABI info
-- Detecting CXX compiler ABI info - done
-- Check for working Fortran compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/gfortran.exe
-- Check for working Fortran compiler: C:/MinGW/bin/gfortran.exe  -- works
-- Detecting Fortran compiler ABI info
-- Detecting Fortran compiler ABI info - done
-- Checking whether C:/MinGW/bin/gfortran.exe supports Fortran 90
-- Checking whether C:/MinGW/bin/gfortran.exe supports Fortran 90 -- yes
-- slfn = FVSiec_sourceList.txt prgName= FVSiec
-- FVSvariant = FVSiec
-- Configuring done
-- Generating done
-- Build files have been written to: <...>/trunk/bin/FVSiec_CmakeDir
-- Configuring done
-- Generating done
-- Build files have been written to: <...>/trunk/bin
}}}

When that is complete, you can proceed to build FVS with the variant sub-directory. You only need to repeat the step of creating a makefile if the underlying set of FVS source files change. Afterward, you can just rebuild the variants you need, based on periodic updates to the source code.

==Building the Executable for Development & Debugging==

At the command-line, `cd` to the directory containing the variant you wish to work with. In the example that follows the Inland Empire + Climate variant (iec) is used, and the makefile will be located here:

{{{
\MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin\FVSiec_CmakeDir\Makefile
}}}

At the command-line, type this to begin building the executable:

{{{
mingw32-make
}}}

When complete, you will find these 4 key components in the variant sub-directory:

|| *Component Name*  || *Language* ||
|| *_FVSiec.exe_*   || FORTRAN ||
|| *_FVSfofem.dll_* || C ||
|| *_FVS_iec.dll_*  || FORTRAN ||
|| *_FVSsql.dll_*   || C || 

==Building the Executable in Batch==

Assuming you have a command-prompt in this directory: 

{{{
\MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin
}}}

you can run the DOS batch file shown below to compile all variants in \bin sub-directory. If you wish to modify this batch file for a subset of variants, please make a copy and use your copy.

{{{
BuildAll_MinGW.bat
}}}

==Redistributables==

FVS executables created with MinGW - the EXE and 3 DLLs - can be freely distributed to others. If these are provided to users who do not have the MinGW system installed (or whose components cannot be found by the PATH variable), the following files will need to be provided. When provided, they can be copied into the directory containing the FVS executable.

|| *Component*        ||
|| libgcc_s_dw2-1.dll ||
|| libgfortran-3.dll  ||
|| libquadmath-0.dll  ||

On a default MinGW installation the release-mode redistributables can be found here: 

{{{
C:\MinGW\bin
}}}

==Switching Between CMake Build Systems==
Most of the time you will probably only want to build MinGW makefiles. However, developers may may need to test their code on a non-MinGW system, and therefore need to build FVS variants with Visual Studio 2010 (see [BuildProcess_VisualStudio]). If you need to do this, you should remove these files and directories before attempting to build with Visual Studio:

{{{
directory: CMakeFiles
file: cmake_install.cmake
file: CMakeCache.txt
}}}

These files and directories contain information that is stored by CMake the first time it is run, and will "lock" CMake into always creating MinGW makefiles. Removing them allows CMake to create other kinds of build systems. 

==Known Limitations==
Builds of FVS created on a 32-bit platform by 32-bit MinGW utilities are not "CPU aware," and will not run on 64-bit Windows operating systems. 