#summary Frequently Asked Questions.
#labels Featured,Phase-QA
#sidebar TableOfContents

This is a basic list of the frequently asked questions (FAQ) for the open-fvs project. 

= Question 1. How do I obtain the source code? =

You can checkout the source code anonymously using [http://subversion.apache.org/ Subversion],

{{{
svn checkout https://open-fvs.googlecode.com/svn open-fvs
}}}

For more information, see the [DownloadingSourceCode] page.

= Question 2. How do I build one of the FVS variants? =

We currently have wiki documents describing the build process on [BuildProcess_UnixAlike Unix-alike] systems, and on Windows systems using [BuildProcess_VisualStudio Visual Studio], [BuildProcess_MinGW MinGW], or [BuildProcess_Rtools Rtools]. 

Builds may be possible on other operating systems or with other compiler packages, but the processes are not documented here. 

= Question 3. The build didn't work. Now what? =

If your build doesn't work, that is to say, you don't get an executable on your machine, attempt to build again and redirect the make output to a debugging file:

{{{
make FVS[variant] > FVS[variant]-make-output.txt 2>&1
}}}

You will also need to provide the operating system, which can be obtained using the output from the `uname -a` command for non-Windows platforms:

{{{
uname -a
Darwin macbook.local 10.8.0 Darwin Kernel Version 10.8.0: Tue Jun  7 16:32:41 PDT 2011; root:xnu-1504.15.3~1/RELEASE_X86_64 x86_64
}}}

and the `ver` command if you're using Windows:

{{{
C:\open-fvs\trunk\bin>ver

Microsoft Windows XP [Version 5.1.2600]

C:\open-fvs\trunk\bin>
}}}

Once you have those two outputs, submit your problem as a new [http://code.google.com/p/open-fvs/issues/entry issue].

= Question 4. How do I get help if I encounter problems? =

The [http://code.google.com/p/open-fvs/issues/list Issues] tab in the open-fvs site has a utility for submitting issues. When submitting an issue include as much detail as possible, including the specific operating system (including the version) you are using. Refer to Question 3 for directions on getting operating system information. The FVS development team will attempt to resolve your issue.

= Question 5. Where can I get production release versions of the executables?=

All of the FVS executables for Windows are avaialable from the [http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/fvs/ FVS website]. They are distributed in an installation package that contains all of the FVS variant executables. Executables for other operating systems are not currently distributed.

= Question 6. Where can I get documentation on the models used in the FVS code? =

The FVS Variant Overviews, which are available from the [http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/fvs/documents/userguides.shtml FVS website], contain information and references related to the underlying models.  The [http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/ftp/fvs/docs/gtr/EssentialFVS.pdf Essential FVS] document contains a great deal of more general model documentation.

= Question 7. How do I make a new variant? =

The instructions for creating a new variant based on the code from an existing variant are found in the [http://code.google.com/p/open-fvs/wiki/MakeNewFVSProgram MakeNewFVSProgram] wiki.