#summary Windows build process
#labels Draft

=Getting Started With The Build Process In Windows=

This wiki documents the process of setting things up on a Windows PC so you can build FVS executables from the source files in the open-fvs repository.  For more information on the build process, including information for builds on other platforms (Mac and Linux) please refer to the [BuildProcess] wiki.

==Getting The Needed Tools==

You will need the *Rtools* toolkit package in order to build the executables.  Download it from http://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/ and install it.  Two directories will be created on your hard drive.  By default they are `C:\Rtools` and `C:\minGW`.  Each of these contains a bin directory.

After installing Rtools on a Windows PC you need to modify the Windows path information to include the `C:\Rtools\bin` and `C:\minGW\bin` directories so the system knows where to find the tools.  This is done as follows.

On Windows 7 or Windows Vista
{{{
Start > Settings > Control Panel > Advanced System Settings > Environment Variables.
}}}
On Windows XP or Windows 2000
{{{
Start > Settings > Control Panel > System.
On the Advanced tab click Environment Variables.
}}}

In the `System Variables` box find and highlight `Path`, then click `Edit`.  To the _end_ of the existing path text add *`;C:\Rtools\bin;C:\minGW\bin`*.  Make sure to include the semicolons.  Also make sure not to delete any of the exising path information in the process.  When you have added the new path info restart the PC.

==Getting The Source Files==

The open-fvs files are stored in a Subversion (SVN) repository.  If you don't have an *SVN client* software package you will probably want to install one.  There are several free SVN packages available for download.  Two examples are Tortoise ([http://tortoisesvn.net/]) and SmartSVN ([http://www.syntevo.com/smartsvn/])

You will use the "checkout" feature of your SVN client software package to download the FVS source files.  Refer to the software documentation if you need help with this.  Designate the repository using the URL http://open-fvs.googlecode.com/svn/.  Select or create an appropriate directory on your hard drive to download the source files into.  For example, you could create a directory on your C drive called `MyFvsFiles`.

==Building The Executable==

Open a Command Window
{{{
Start > (All) Programs > Accessories > Command Prompt
}}}
Use the `cd` command to navigate to the `trunk\bin` directory inside the directory into which you checked out the open-fvs files.  If you had placed the files into a directory called `MyFvsFiles` you would type the command as shown below.
{{{
cd \MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin
}}}
The prompt in the command window should change to reflect the directory you just typed.  In the example above the prompt should look as shown below.  If it doesn't, repeat the command shown above.
{{{
C:\MyFvsFiles\trunk\bin>
}}}

The FVS variant executables are named `FVSxxx.exe`, where the `xxx` is the 2-letter abbreviation for the variant (e.g., `ie` for Inland Empire or `ls` for Lake States) optionally followed by the 1-letter abbreviation for an extension (e.g., `x` for the insect and disease extensions, or `c` for the climate extension).  To make an executable on a Windows PC type the command `make FVSxxx.exe` with `xxx` replaced by the variant and extension designations.  For example, to build the Inland Empire variant with the Climate extension you would use the command below.
{{{
make FVSiec.exe
}}}
A sourcelist file needs to exist in the `trunk\bin` directory in order to build the variants in this way.  For example, the file `FVSls_sourceList.txt` allows you to use the `make` command to build the variant executable `FVSls.exe`.  Not all variants currently have a sourcelist, but we're working on it.